Embedded System Memory Model


In an embedded system with Flash and SRAM, the various segments of the memory model are typically allocated as follows:

1. Flash Memory
Flash memory is non-volatile and is used to store code and data that need to persist across power cycles. The following segments are usually loaded into Flash:

.text Segment
This segment contains the program's executable code (machine instructions). It is always stored in Flash because it doesn’t need to be modified during runtime.

.rodata Segment
This segment holds read-only data, such as string literals and constant variables (const). It is stored in Flash because it does not require runtime modifications.

2. SRAM (RAM)
SRAM is volatile memory used for data that changes during program execution. The following segments are typically loaded into SRAM:

.data Segment

Contains initialized global and static variables.
The initial values of these variables are stored in Flash at program startup and then copied to SRAM during system initialization (e.g., by a startup routine or bootloader).
Example: int x = 5; (initialized global variable).
.bss Segment

Contains uninitialized global and static variables.
At startup, these variables are zero-initialized in SRAM.
Example: int y; or static int z; (uninitialized global/static variables).
Heap and Stack

Heap: Used for dynamically allocated memory (malloc, new, etc.).
Stack: Used for function call frames, local variables, and return addresses.
Both are entirely located in SRAM.

Memory Allocation Summary
Segment	        Flash	                          SRAM
.text	        Program code      	               —
.rodata	      Read-only constants	               —
.data	        Initial values (in Flash)	     Copied at runtime
.bss	            —	                         Zero-initialized
Heap	            —	                         Fully in SRAM
Stack           	—	                         Fully in SRAM

Example Workflow
Startup Process:
The bootloader or startup code copies the .data segment from Flash to SRAM.
It initializes the .bss segment to zero in SRAM.
Runtime:
Code executes from Flash (.text).
Variables in .data and .bss, along with heap and stack, reside in SRAM for faster access.
This separation ensures the efficient use of non-volatile Flash for static code and constants, while volatile SRAM is used for dynamic and modifiable data during execution.

Question:
For example there is an initialized global data
int pp = 10;
Here whether variable pp will be stored under SRAM and value 10 will be loaded in Flash and then copied to SRAM. Is it like that?
Answer:
Yes, your understanding is correct. Here's a breakdown of what happens to the variable int pp = 10; in an embedded system with Flash and SRAM:

At Compile Time:
Variable Definition: int pp = 10; is an initialized global variable, which means it belongs to the .data segment.
Storage Allocation:
The variable pp (its address) is allocated in SRAM.
The initial value 10 is stored in Flash as part of the firmware image.

At Runtime (During System Initialization):
Startup Code Execution:
During the system startup, the startup code or bootloader is responsible for copying initialized data from Flash to SRAM.
The initial value 10 is read from Flash and written into the memory location of pp in SRAM.
Result:
The variable pp resides in SRAM during program execution, allowing it to be modified if needed.
The original initial value 10 remains in Flash (as part of the firmware) and is not used again after initialization.
Why is this Done?
Flash is Non-Volatile: Flash memory retains the data (like the initial value 10) even when the system is powered off.
SRAM is Faster: The variable is copied to SRAM at runtime to allow faster access and modification.
Example in Memory
Assume the system starts running:

Memory Type	Segment	Content
Flash	.data	Initial value 10 for pp.
SRAM	.data	Variable pp with value 10.
Modifications During Runtime
After initialization, the variable pp exists in SRAM, so it can be modified freely. For example:

c
Copy code
pp = 20; // Changes the value in SRAM
The new value (20) is stored in SRAM.
The original value (10) in Flash remains unchanged and unused unless the system is reset.
This mechanism ensures that the embedded system uses Flash efficiently for non-volatile storage while leveraging the speed of SRAM for runtime operations.
